= Attributes
James Elliott <james@deepsymmetry.org>
:icons: font
:experimental:

Most of the drawing functions that you can call have a parameter that
let you specify _attributes_ to configure details about what you want
them to do. In the end, the attributes boil down to a
https://clojure.org/reference/reader#_maps[Clojure map] whose keys are
keywords that identify the attribute being configured, and whose
values are what you want to use for that attribute.

The specific attributes accepted by each function are described in the
<<funcs#,function documentation>>. Some attributes are used by the
function itself, and some are passed along to the SVG to become
https://developer.mozilla.org/en-US/docs/Web/SVG/Attribute[SVG
attributes] of the element you are drawing.

[[attribute-expressions]]
== Attribute Expressions

Because you often want to reuse and combine the same sets of
attributes when drawing your diagrams, `bytefield-svg` offers a
shorthand way to express many useful operations concisely, without
requiring you to build up the map explicitly. Drawing functions which
accept attributes will process this notation for you.

> If you are interested in the intricate details, attribute
  expressions are interpreted by the
  <<funcs#eval-attribute-spec,function `eval-attribute-spec`>> near
  the top of the
  https://github.com/Deep-Symmetry/bytefield-svg/blob/master/src/org/deepsymmetry/bytefield/core.cljs[source].

=== Raw Maps

In the simplest case, you can pass a map of attributes that you build
yourself, such as when you want to tell `draw-box` to consume the
space normally taken by two boxes:

[source,clojure]
(draw-box 42 {:span 2})

The second argument to `draw-box` is an attribute expression. In this
case we have told it that the `:span` attribute should have the value
`2`.

=== Named Attributes

If you want to use one of the <<predefined-attributes,predefined
sets>> of attributes, instead of a map you can pass the keyword that
names them. For example, if you want to render some text in the same
style normally used for drawing hexadecimal numbers, you can reference
the attribute set named `:hex` as the second (attribute) argument to
the <<funcs#text,`text` function>>:

[source,clojure]
(text "NUL" :hex)

When a keyword is found as an attribute expression, that keyword is
looked up in the `named-attributes` table, and the corresponding value
is used as the attributes to control the drawing.

In addition to the predefined values that start out in that table, you
can add your own named attribute definitions by calling the
<<funcs#defattrs,`defattrs`>> function, perhaps in a shared include
file.

=== Combining Attributes

Sometimes you want to combine multiple attribute specifications,
perhaps starting with a named set of attributes and then augmenting or
modifying it somehow. To express that you can pass a
https://clojure.org/reference/reader#_vectors[vector] of attribute
expressions, and each expression in turn will be evaluated into a map
as described by this section, and the later maps will be
https://clojuredocs.org/clojure.core/merge[merged] into the earlier
ones. The merge process allows later keys to replace earlier values,
which is how you can override as well as adding on to the predefined
attribute sets.

For example, here is an attribute expression that starts with the
predefined `:plain` text attributes but establishes a lighter font
weight:

[source,clojure]
----
[:plain {:font-weight "light"}]
----

And here is how to draw a box using the predefined `:related` (dotted)
border styles, in addition to a purple background (assuming your
diagram has called `defattrs` to set up the `:bg-purple` style), that
takes up the space of four normal boxes:

[source,clojure]
(draw-box "Unknown" [:box-related :bg-purple {:span 4}])

=== No Attributes

If you don’t want to pass any attributes at all, you can either pass
an empty map, `{}`, or `nil` which is interpreted in the same way.
This tells the function to use its default values and behaviors. But
most functions which accept an attribute parameter also allow you to
call them with fewer parameters, and treat that as if you had passed
`nil` for the attributes. You only need to pass the `nil` if you want
to pass a value for parameter that comes later, but don’t care to send
attributes.


[[predefined-attributes]]
== Predefined Attributes

The following named attributes are set up for your diagram to use
(although you are free to call `defattrs` to modify or replace any of
these, as well as to add your own new sets).

[cols="1m,4"]
|===
|Key |Purpose

|:hex |The default text style in which hexadecimal values are drawn,
 with a `:font-size` of `18` and `:font-family` `"Courier New,
 monospace"`.

|:plain |The default text style in which string values are drawn, with
 a `:font-size` of `18` and `:font-family` `"Palatino, Georgia, Times
 New Roman, serif"`.

|:math |A text style you can use for writing math-expression-like
 text, with a `:font-size` of `18`, `:font-family` `"Palatino,
 Georgia, Times New Roman, serif"`, and `:font-style` `"italic"`.

| |
|:sub |A text style for creating subscripted nested `tspan` objects.
|:super |A text style for creating superscripted nested `tspan` objects.
|:bold |Adds bolding (`:font-weight` `"bold"`) when merged into
 another text style.

| |
|:dotted |A line style for drawing dotted lines. Commonly used with
 borders, but you can use it when calling the
 <<funcs#draw-line,`draw-line` function>> and
 https://github.com/liebke/analemma[lower-level SVG drawing
 primitives] too.

|:border-unrelated |The line styles for drawing the borders of boxes
 whose content is separate from the boxes around them (this uses the
 default line drawing style).

|:border-related |The line styles styles for drawing the borders of
 boxes that are related to those around them (this uses a
 `:stroke-dasharray` of `"1,3"` which is a light dotted line).

|:box-first |A set of border styles for the first box in a row of
 related boxes. It uses the unrelated style for its left, top, and
 bottom borders, and the related style for its right border.

|:box-related |A set of border styles for a middle box in a row of
 related boxes. It uses the unrelated style for its top, and bottom
 borders, and the related style for its left and right borders.

|:box-last |A set of border styles for the last box in a row of
 related boxes. It uses the unrelated style for its right, top, and
 bottom borders, and the related style for its left border.

[[box-above]]
|:box-above |A set of border styles for a box that is open to the row
 below. It draws only its left, right, and top borders.

|:box-above-related |A set of border styles for a box that is open to
 the row below and related to the previous box. It draws only its
 left, right, and top borders, and the left border is drawn in the
 `:box-related` style.

|:box-below |A set of border styles for a box that is open to the row
 above. It draws only its left, right, and bottom borders.
|===

For examples of how to combine the box styles, the source for the
diagrams in the https://djl-analysis.deepsymmetry.org/[DJ Link
Ecosystem Analysis] is full of variations. You can see it by clicking
the **Edit this Page** link at the top right of a page that looks
interesting.

include::partial$Footer.adoc[]
